Add the block registration RFC (#13693)
WordPress/gutenberg: docs/rfc/block-registration.md

> This RFC is intended to serve both as a specification and as documentation for the implementation of runtime-agnostic block type registration.

Author: Some important aspects here:

 - The block library package are served as an npm package, we don't know where these will be run
 - The block repository (one of the 9 projects) need to be able to get block information outside of WordPress

I guess this could be added somewhere

## Requirements

Behind any block type registration is some abstract concept of a unit of content. This content type can be described without consideration of any particular technology. In much the same way, we should be able to describe the core constructs of a block type in a way which can be interpreted in any runtime.

In more practical terms, an implementation should fulfill requirements that...

* A block type registration should be declarative and context-agnostic. Any runtime (PHP, JS, or other) should be able to interpret the basics of a block type (see "Block API" in the sections below) and should be able to fetch or retrieve the definitions of the context-specific implementation details. The following things should be made possible:
  * Building REST APIs to fetch the available block types

>   * Building REST APIs to fetch block objects from posts

Author: How would you phrase it?

>   * Building REST APIs to fetch block objects from posts

Reviewer: I'm not 100% sure, to be honest. Maybe:

> * Fetching the available block types through REST APIs.
> * Fetching block objects from posts through REST APIs.

The implementation of blocks in non-`post_content` contexts might better inform how this should manifest itself.

>   * Building REST APIs to fetch block objects from posts

Reviewer 2: Updated in 9a78d018cecf20acf375abe55a0de617232ea4bc.

* This API should be backward compatible with what we have at the moment.

> * It should be possible to statically analyze a block type in order to support advanced use-cases required by one of the [9 projects](https://make.wordpress.org/core/2018/12/08/9-priorities-for-2019/) for 2019 in Wordpress: "Building a WordPress.org directory for discovering blocks, and a way to seamlessly install them."

Author: > This could use a great deal more clarification

The block repository/directory should not have to parse JavaScript files or php files to understand the block types, their names, icons, descriptions... in order to show a proper directory.

It can statically analyze the files of any plugin to retrieve blocks and their properties.

> * It should be possible to statically analyze a block type in order to support advanced use-cases required by one of the [9 projects](https://make.wordpress.org/core/2018/12/08/9-priorities-for-2019/) for 2019 in Wordpress: "Building a WordPress.org directory for discovering blocks, and a way to seamlessly install them."

Reviewer 2: Fixed `p` in 261754e and clarified directory thing in b8d0e1b.

* It should not require a build tool compilation step (e.g. Babel, Webpack) to author code which would be referenced in a block type definition.

> * There should allow the potential to dynamically load ("lazy-load") block types, or parts of block type definitions.

Author: - It means the editor should be able to be shown/loaded without enqueuing all the assets (scripts/styles) of all block types: It can load the titles/icons... synchronously but leave all the `edit/save/transforms`... for the moment they are used (inserted into the post content).

For example, a playlist block won't load mediaelement unless used, a syntax highlighter won't be loaded unless the code/html blocks are loaded...

Another aspect of the lazy-loading is the possibility to enqueue only the styles/scripts required by blocks used in the frontend.

It doesn't mean we're going to solve these right now, but it means, the registration API should allow it.

> * There should allow the potential to dynamically load ("lazy-load") block types, or parts of block type definitions.

Reviewer 2: JS and CSS resources wouldn't be loaded by the browser until they would be explicitly selected in UI. More in Webpack docs: https://webpack.js.org/guides/lazy-loading/

I'm sure we can also find easier to follow articles online.

> * There should allow the potential to dynamically load ("lazy-load") block types, or parts of block type definitions.

Reviewer: >     * It means the editor should be able to be shown/loaded without enqueuing all the assets (scripts/styles) of all block types: It can load the titles/icons... synchronously but leave all the `edit/save/transforms`... for the moment they are used (inserted into the post content).

Is it worth including this in the RFC? I think this is implied knowledge that would be better off as explicitly stated.

> * There should allow the potential to dynamically load ("lazy-load") block types, or parts of block type definitions.

Reviewer 2: Clarified in b8d0e1b as suggested.

```js
blocks[ 'core/heading' ].icon = // SVG element of the icon. 
```

### Title

* Type: string
* Required
* Localized: Yes
* Property: `title`

```json
{ "title": "Heading" }
```

This is the display title for your block, which can be translated with our translation functions. The block inserter will show this name.

### Category

* Type: string
* Required
* Localized: No
* Property: `category`

```json
{ "category": "common" }
```

Blocks are grouped into categories to help users browse and discover them.

The core provided categories are:

* common
* formatting
* layout
* widgets
* embed

Plugins and Themes can also register [custom block categories](https://wordpress.org/gutenberg/handbook/designers-developers/developers/filters/block-filters/#managing-block-categories).

An implementation should expect and tolerate unknown categories, providing some reasonable fallback behavior (e.g. a "common" category).

### Icon

* Type: object
* Optional
* Localized: No
* Property: `icon`

```json
{
	"slug": "star", // Dashicon slug, serve as a fallback if non-js contexts. 

> 	"src": "./my-file.js", // Path to a JavaScript file containing the block's icon property

Author: For me these are not meant to be loaded by the browser directly, instead a smart "bundler" should be able to traverse it and include the dependencies, like webpack does for "css/js/younameit" imports.

> 	"src": "./my-file.js", // Path to a JavaScript file containing the block's icon property

Reviewer: > For me these JSON files are not meant to be loaded by the browser directly, instead a smart "bundler" should be able to traverse it and include the dependencies, like webpack does for "css/js/younameit" imports.

Is this worth stating explicitly in the RFC?

> 	"src": "./my-file.js", // Path to a JavaScript file containing the block's icon property

Reviewer 2: You can't bundle JSON directly into the browser. I think this is an implementation detail and initially, it might be even not a case for the WordPress client code as we will expose those definitions through PHP anyway.

It's more a future consideration for those consumers who plan to use core blocks without WordPress as a backend. I think it's fine to leave this issue to be solved for themselves. On our end we will have to process those JSON files and replicated servers-side exposure for our unit tests.

_TBD: Describe the resolution behavior by file extension, and consider further extension-specific subtypes (e.g. WPDefinedJSPropertyFile)._

### Save

* Type: string (`WPDefinedPropertyFile`)
* Optional
* Localized: No
* Property: `save`

```json
{ "save": "my-block-save.js" }
```

This property is a pointer to a JavaScript file containing the save function of the block type. The save function defines the way in which the different attributes should be combined into the final markup, which is then serialized by Gutenberg into `post_content`.

See the [Edit and Save](https://wordpress.org/gutenberg/handbook/designers-developers/developers/block-api/block-edit-save/) documentation for more details.

If omitted, the implementation should fall back to one as if it were defined as a function returning `null`, where the expected behavior is to serialize without any inner HTML (a "void block").

### Render Callback

* Type: string (`WPDefinedPropertyFile`)
* Optional
* Localized: No
* Property: `renderCallback`

```json
{ "renderCallback": "my-block-render-callback.php" }
```

> This is a pointer to a php file returning a render callback php function.  The render callback is function called when the block is rendered on the frontend. It's used to generate the frontend markup dynamically.

Author: If there's a valid use-case for it. The API could be extended if needed. The important thing is that it can be changed without BC.

See the [dynamic blocks documentation](https://wordpress.org/gutenberg/handbook/designers-developers/developers/tutorials/block-tutorial/creating-dynamic-blocks/) for more details.

### Styles Variations

*   Type: array
*   Optional
*   Localized: No
*   Property: `styleVariations`

```json
{ 
    "styleVariations": 
        [ 
			{ "name": "default", "label": "Default", "isDefault": true }, 
			{ "name": "other", "label": "Other" }
		]
}
```

Block styles can be used to provide alternative styles to block. It works by adding a class name to the block's wrapper. Using CSS, a theme developer can target the class name for the style variation if it is selected.

Plugins and Themes can also register [custom block style](https://wordpress.org/gutenberg/handbook/designers-developers/developers/filters/block-filters/#block-style-variations) for existing blocks.

### Transforms

* Type: string
* Optional
* Localized: No
* Property: `transforms`

```json
{ "transforms": "my-block-transforms.js" }
```

> This property is a pointer to a JavaScript file containing the save function of the block transforms. The save function defines the way in which the different attributes should be combined into the final markup, which is then serialized by Gutenberg into `post_content`.

Author: Can you expand more?

> This property is a pointer to a JavaScript file containing the save function of the block transforms. The save function defines the way in which the different attributes should be combined into the final markup, which is then serialized by Gutenberg into `post_content`.

Reviewer: The most immediate use-case that comes to mind is:

1. Developer creates a block type which saves markup variation A. Developer also implements styling for variation A.
2. Editorial publish dozens of blocks with markup variation A.
3. Due to changing business requirements, developer modifies original block type to save markup variation B.

Currently, the developer must keep the styling around for markup variation A as well as implement styling for markup variation B. There's no way to programmatically transform all blocks with variation A into variation B.

Styling isn't the only dependency on markup. If the site has analytics tied to the markup, the associated logic for both variations will need to be kept around (growing in complexity over time).

If we had server-side transform definitions, the developer would be able to run a WP-CLI command that batch transforms all markup variation A into markup variation B.

The less-preferable workaround we have right now is to use dynamic blocks, which means markup isn't ever stored in the post content.

> This property is a pointer to a JavaScript file containing the save function of the block transforms. The save function defines the way in which the different attributes should be combined into the final markup, which is then serialized by Gutenberg into `post_content`.

Author: Got it this ties to the deprectatedVersions api we have right now. I do think this workflow deservers improvements but I think it should be addressed separately from this RFC. The solution might be to add a new property here but I think it's a complex problem on its own to warrant a separate RFC/PR

> This property is a pointer to a JavaScript file containing the save function of the block transforms. The save function defines the way in which the different attributes should be combined into the final markup, which is then serialized by Gutenberg into `post_content`.

Reviewer: > Got it this ties to the deprectatedVersions api we have right now. I do think this workflow deservers improvements but I think it should be addressed separately from this RFC. The solution might be to add a new property here but I think it's a complex problem on its own to warrant a separate RFC/PR

Fair enough, this works for me. Do you want to open a new issue for it? I'm not sure of the best contents for it.

I've thought of another use-case today: migrating (or importing) content into WordPress from another source. I'd prefer to migrate (import) to block-native format. At the moment, I'm left with either migrating to Classic editor format or hand-forming blocks.

> This property is a pointer to a JavaScript file containing the save function of the block transforms. The save function defines the way in which the different attributes should be combined into the final markup, which is then serialized by Gutenberg into `post_content`.

Reviewer 2: > Fair enough, this works for me. Do you want to open a new issue for it? I'm not sure of the best contents for it.
> 
> I've thought of another use-case today: migrating (or importing) content into WordPress from another source. I'd prefer to migrate (import) to block-native format. At the moment, I'm left with either migrating to Classic editor format or hand-forming blocks.

Yes, those are both very good points. I think with this RFC we want to start the process of moving all basic metadata to JSON file to make it easy to consume by PHP code. This will surely open new options for further investigation. Definitely, deprecations and transformations are those aspects which might be somehow encoded in a way that could work on both sides. I also want to echo what @youknowriad said, this is complex and we want to keep this RFC very focused so we could finish the very first iteration in a few weeks so we could land it in let's say optimistically in WordPress 5.3 :)

See the [Transforms](https://wordpress.org/gutenberg/handbook/designers-developers/developers/block-api/block-registration/#transforms-optional) documentation for more details.

### Deprecated versions

* Type: object[]
* Optional
* Localized: No
* Property: `deprecated`

```json

> { "deprecated": [ { attributes, save, supports } ] }

Reviewer 3: I wondered if another option for the deprecated property could be to link to another previous version of the block.json. 

Creating a deprecation could be copying the current implementation into a subfolder, referencing it, and then making changes to the block in the current folder.

Author: It seems like a good option but would require the plugin author to keep a lot more code around. I'm not against though.

Reviewer 2: This example needs to be further adjusted as it is not valid JSON at the moment.

* Using a statically-defined, JSON-formatted block type definition enables easy integration in both JavaScript and PHP runtimes.
* Registering a block type in PHP would allow for attribute default values to be assigned as dynamically generated from some external state (e.g. a database value, or localized string).
* By default, JSON does not support localization or dynamic values.
* On the server, a block type `icon` property can only be assigned as a string and thus cannot support SVGs and component-based icons.

---

# Block Type Registration RFC

## Introduction

Blocks are the fundamental elements of the editor. They are the primary way in which plugins and themes can register their own functionality and extend the capabilities of the editor.

## Registering a block type

To register a new block type, start by creating a `block.json` file. This file:

* Gives a name to the block type.
* Defines some important metadata about the registered block type (title, category, icon, description, keywords).
* Defines the attributes of the block type.
* Links to the editor implementation of your block type, the save function and any other context-aware property.

**Example:**

> ```json

Reviewer 4: We should either update these JSON snippets to omit the inline comments, so that they're in a valid format, or change this to be [JSON5](https://json5.org/), where the comments would be valid.

```suggestion
```json5
```

Reviewer 2: Let's remove those comments as they are only added as hints in those examples.

Reviewer 2: Done in 288853c.

**Important Note:**

Other block properties that point to JavaScript files use this identifier to provide values of the given properties.

For instance, to define an SVG icon in a `block.js` file, you should attach it to the blocks global variable like so:

```js
blocks[ 'core/heading' ].icon = // SVG element of the icon. 
```

### Title

* Type: string
* Required
* Localized: Yes
* Property: `title`

```json
{ "title": "Heading" }
```

This is the display title for your block, which can be translated with our translation functions. The block inserter will show this name.

### Category

* Type: string
* Required
* Localized: No
* Property: `category`

```json
{ "category": "common" }
```

Blocks are grouped into categories to help users browse and discover them.

The core provided categories are:

* common
* formatting
* layout
* widgets
* embed

Plugins and Themes can also register [custom block categories](https://wordpress.org/gutenberg/handbook/designers-developers/developers/filters/block-filters/#managing-block-categories).

> An implementation should expect and tolerate unknown categories, providing some reasonable fallback behavior (e.g. a "common" category).

Reviewer 2: So we have it covered. Nice. We will have to double check how strict block registration is at the moment. It's particularly important for the future work of WordPress.org blocks directory where you would be able to install plugins using the definition provided when using the inserter but you wouldn't have a given category registered as it is hidden inside PHP or JS code.

* By default, JSON does not support localization or dynamic values.
* On the server, a block type `icon` property can only be assigned as a string and thus cannot support SVGs and component-based icons.

---

# Block Type Registration RFC

## Introduction

Blocks are the fundamental elements of the editor. They are the primary way in which plugins and themes can register their own functionality and extend the capabilities of the editor.

## Registering a block type

To register a new block type, start by creating a `block.json` file. This file:

* Gives a name to the block type.
* Defines some important metadata about the registered block type (title, category, icon, description, keywords).
* Defines the attributes of the block type.
* Links to the editor implementation of your block type, the save function and any other context-aware property.

**Example:**

```json
{
	"name": "my-plugin/notice",
	"title": "Notice",
	"category": "common",
	"icon": "star",
	"description": "Shows warning, error or success notices  ...",
	"keywords": [ "alert", "message" ],
	"attributes": {
		"message": {
			"type": "string",
			"source": "html",
			"selector": ".meessage"
		}
	},

> 	"edit": "blocks/notice-edit.js",

Reviewer 5: What are the long term expectations of this separation? Is it anticipated that "edit" could be plural based on environments (like mobile native)? Is it useful to specify these (implementation?) details on the definition file?

Reviewer 2: It's more designed this way to be able to load the asset containing `edit` definition only when the block is being inserted into the editor.

Author: I can see a potential "edit:native". In a similar way, I see `render_callback:drupal`.

See the [the attributes documentation](https://wordpress.org/gutenberg/handbook/designers-developers/developers/block-api/block-attributes/) for more details.

### Edit

* Type: `string` (`WPDefinedPropertyFile`)
* Optional
* Localized: No
* Property: `edit`

```json
{ "edit": "my-block-edit.js" }
```

This property is a pointer to a JavaScript file containing the edit function of the block type. The edit function describes the structure of your block in the context of the editor. This represents what the editor will render when the block is used.

See the [Edit and Save](https://wordpress.org/gutenberg/handbook/designers-developers/developers/block-api/block-edit-save/) documentation for more details.

**Important Note:**

The `WPDefinedPropertyFile` type described here is a subtype of string, where the value must represent an absolute or relative path to a file by which a dynamic value or values of a property can be interpreted.

_TBD: Describe the resolution behavior by file extension, and consider further extension-specific subtypes (e.g. WPDefinedJSPropertyFile)._

### Save

* Type: `string` (`WPDefinedPropertyFile`)

> * Optional

Reviewer 2: At the moment `save` is required. I opened https://github.com/WordPress/gutenberg/pull/14510 to make it optional.

Reviewer 2: It's now optional.

* On the server, a block type `icon` property can only be assigned as a string and thus cannot support SVGs and component-based icons.

---

# Block Type Registration RFC

## Introduction

Blocks are the fundamental elements of the editor. They are the primary way in which plugins and themes can register their own functionality and extend the capabilities of the editor.

## Registering a block type

To register a new block type, start by creating a `block.json` file. This file:

* Gives a name to the block type.
* Defines some important metadata about the registered block type (title, category, icon, description, keywords).
* Defines the attributes of the block type.
* Links to the editor implementation of your block type, the save function and any other context-aware property.

**Example:**

```json
{
	"name": "my-plugin/notice",
	"title": "Notice",
	"category": "common",
	"icon": "star",
	"description": "Shows warning, error or success notices  ...",
	"keywords": [ "alert", "message" ],
	"attributes": {
		"message": {
			"type": "string",
			"source": "html",
			"selector": ".meessage"
		}
	},
	"edit": "blocks/notice-edit.js",

> 	"save": "blocks/notice-save.js",

Reviewer 6: The trailing comma prevents this from parsing as valid json.

Reviewer 2: Fixed in https://github.com/WordPress/gutenberg/pull/13693/commits/2df7f19b360d9d223212167fe5dc5531a3a8accd in 2 more places. Thanks for catching.

### Transforms

* Type: `string`
* Optional
* Localized: No
* Property: `transforms`

```json
{ "transforms": "my-block-transforms.js" }
```

This property is a pointer to a JavaScript file containing the save function of the block transforms. The save function defines the way in which the different attributes should be combined into the final markup, which is then serialized by Gutenberg into `post_content`.

See the [Transforms](https://wordpress.org/gutenberg/handbook/designers-developers/developers/block-api/block-registration/#transforms-optional) documentation for more details.

### Deprecated versions

* Type: `object[]`
* Optional
* Localized: No
* Property: `deprecated`

```json
{ "deprecated": [ {
	"attributes": {},
	"save": "my-deprecated-save.js",
	"supports": {}
} ] }
```

This property contains the definition of the deprecated versions of the block type. It is used to ensure that old blocks with old markup are not considered invalid.

See the [Deprecated Blocks](https://wordpress.org/gutenberg/handbook/designers-developers/developers/block-api/block-deprecation/) documentation for more details.

> ### Supports

Reviewer 2: @youknowriad - should we exclude `supports` from the `block.json` definition with the premise of introducing an alternative way of handling similar use cases?

Author: That's a good question. My feeling right now is that if we exclude it, a lot of blocks won't be able to move to the new `block.json` definition unless the alternative is ready. At the moment it's not clear what is this alternative.

Reviewer 2: Yes, I shared the same concern in https://github.com/WordPress/gutenberg/pull/13693#issuecomment-481192490.

* Type: `object`
* Optional
* Localized: No
* Property: `supports`

Optional block extended support features. 

See the [block supports](https://wordpress.org/gutenberg/handbook/designers-developers/developers/block-api/block-registration/#supports-optional) documentation page for more details.

### Stylesheets

* Type: `object`
* Optional
* Localized: No
* Property: `stylesheets`

```json
{
	"stylesheets": {
		"main": "my-block-style.css",
		"editor": "my-block-editor-style.css",
		"theme": "my-block-theme-style.css"
	}
}
```

This property is a pointer to CSS files containing the CSS used for the block in different contexts.

> ## Internationalization

Reviewer 2: Updated according to the chat started in the weekly Core JS meeting last week (link requires registration):

https://wordpress.slack.com/archives/C5UNMSU4R/p1554216514081900

> Localized properties are automatically wrapped in `_x` function calls on the backend and the frontend of WordPress. These translations are added as an inline script to the `wp-block-library` script handle in WordPress core or to the plugin's script handle when it defines metadata defintion.

Reviewer 4: From: https://make.wordpress.org/core/handbook/best-practices/spelling/

The recommendation is to use "back end" and "front end" as separate words.

I thought I'd recalled reading something in the past about avoiding this terminology altogether (vs. "administrative dashboard" or other), but I'm not able to find it now and the above Spelling page would lead me to believe it's an expected phrase.

Also a small typo on "definition".

```suggestion
Localized properties are automatically wrapped in `_x` function calls on the back end and the front end of WordPress. These translations are added as an inline script to the `wp-block-library` script handle in WordPress core or to the plugin's script handle when it defines metadata definition.
```

> WordPress string discovery automatically includes these strings to the plugin's or core's domain name.

Reviewer 4: I might suggest "translates ... using" in place of "includes ... to" ? If the idea is in describing how it applies the domain argument for translation functions.

I'm not sure if it's just myself, but I find use of "core" phrasing (at least in documentation) to maybe not be clear. I'd considered whether it might just be better to call it "the default domain", but I find that could also lead to a different confusion on whether it's expected to be provided by the plugin author.

It occurs to me that for the "core domain", it would just not be specified at all?

Finally, when referencing "domain", I don't know if calling it as "domain name" might cause some confusion around the [canonical understanding of a domain name](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Domain_name), even if it's not technically inaccurate to call it as such. "text domain" is the [full name](https://www.gnu.org/software/gawk/manual/html_node/Explaining-gettext.html) of the concept, and seems suitable as an in-place replacement. Maybe even making it specific to the value provided in the plugin manifest.

```suggestion
WordPress string discovery automatically translates these strings using the `textdomain` value specified in the plugin header.
```

**Example:**

```json
{
	"title": "My block",
	"description": "My block is fantastic",
	"keywords": [ "fanstastic" ]
}
```

> in JavScript with help of Babel plugin becomes:

Reviewer 4: Typo: "JavaScript"

Seems a full sentence, so capitalize appropriate?

It's probably not obvious to the reader what you're referring to with the Babel plugin. A link to a related resource could help.

```suggestion
In JavaScript, with the help of a Babel plugin, this becomes:
```

```js
const metadata = {
	title: _x( 'My block', 'block title', 'my-plugin' ),
	description: _x( 'My block is fantastic', 'block description', 'my-plugin' ),
	keywords: [ _x( 'fanstastic', 'block keywords', 'my-plugin' ) ],
}
```

> in PHP it gets transformed on the fly to code close to:

Reviewer 4: Seems a full sentence, so capitalize appropriate?

It's not clear to me how specific we want to be with precisely how this transformation occurs.

Is "on the fly" a well understood idiom? Maybe worth avoiding.

```suggestion
In PHP, it is transformed at runtime to code roughly equivalent to:
```

* Using a statically-defined, JSON-formatted block type definition enables easy integration in both JavaScript and PHP runtimes.
* Registering a block type in PHP would allow for attribute default values to be assigned as dynamically generated from some external state (e.g. a database value, or localized string).
* By default, JSON does not support localization or dynamic values.
* On the server, a block type `icon` property can only be assigned as a string and thus cannot support SVGs and component-based icons.

---

## Introduction

Blocks are the fundamental elements of the editor. They are the primary way in which plugins and themes can register their own functionality and extend the capabilities of the editor.

## Registering a block type

To register a new block type, start by creating a `block.json` file. This file:

* Gives a name to the block type.
* Defines some important metadata about the registered block type (title, category, icon, description, keywords).
* Defines the attributes of the block type.
* Links to the editor implementation of your block type, the save function and any other context-aware property.

**Example:**

```json
{

> 	"name": "my-plugin/notice",

Reviewer 2: There is also `parent` field which is used for child blocks, e.g.:

```js
parent: [ 'core/columns' ],
```

Reviewer 2: Added with 04050e37d9b7bb664ff2d9459e631b732b0890af

	"title": "Notice",
	"category": "common",
	"icon": "star",
	"description": "Shows warning, error or success notices  ...",
	"keywords": [ "alert", "message" ],
	"attributes": {
		"message": {
			"type": "string",
			"source": "html",
			"selector": ".meessage"
		}
	},
	"edit": "blocks/notice-edit.js",

> 	"save": "blocks/notice-save.js"

Reviewer 7: Why do we need to specify these files in the JSON, wouldn't a convention to always have them named accordingly notice-edit, notice-save, notice-native-edit etc. give us a lighter config and consistence?

		{ "name": "other", "label": "Other" }
	]
}
```

Block styles can be used to provide alternative styles to block. It works by adding a class name to the block's wrapper. Using CSS, a theme developer can target the class name for the style variation if it is selected.

Plugins and Themes can also register [custom block style](https://wordpress.org/gutenberg/handbook/designers-developers/developers/filters/block-filters/#block-style-variations) for existing blocks.

### Transforms

* Type: `string`
* Optional
* Localized: No
* Property: `transforms`

```json
{ "transforms": "my-block-transforms.js" }
```

This property is a pointer to a JavaScript file containing the save function of the block transforms. The save function defines the way in which the different attributes should be combined into the final markup, which is then serialized by Gutenberg into `post_content`.

See the [Transforms](https://wordpress.org/gutenberg/handbook/designers-developers/developers/block-api/block-registration/#transforms-optional) documentation for more details.

### Deprecated versions

* Type: `object[]`
* Optional
* Localized: No
* Property: `deprecated`

```json
{ "deprecated": [ {

> 	"attributes": {},

Reviewer 2: Noting that hardcoding `attributes` might produce lots of duplication when it gets moved to the JSON file. It's often the case that those attributes are shared between several deprecated definitions and the current set as well. Given that `deprecated` definitions should never change it should be fine. I hope it will cause some additional work for the transition only.

	"save": "my-deprecated-save.js",
	"supports": {}

> } ] }

Reviewer 2: There are also blocks which define `migrate` function, e.g. Block or Cover blocks.

Author: Maybe the whole deprecated versions is just assigned a single file in a single property (to avoid unnecessary bloat in the block.json file)

Reviewer 2: Yes, #14979 presents how this would look in action.

## Internationalization

Localized properties are automatically wrapped in `_x` function calls on the back end and the front end of WordPress. These translations are added as an inline script to the `wp-block-library` script handle in WordPress core or to the plugin's script handle when it defines metadata definition.

WordPress string discovery automatically translates these strings using the `textdomain` value specified in the plugin header.

**Example:**

```json
{
	"title": "My block",
	"description": "My block is fantastic",
	"keywords": [ "fanstastic" ]
}
```

In JavaScript, with the help of a Babel plugin, this becomes:

```js
const metadata = {
	title: _x( 'My block', 'block title', 'my-plugin' ),
	description: _x( 'My block is fantastic', 'block description', 'my-plugin' ),
	keywords: [ _x( 'fanstastic', 'block keywords', 'my-plugin' ) ],
}
```

In PHP, it is transformed at runtime to code roughly equivalent to:

```php
$metadata = array(
	'title' => _x( 'My block', 'block title', 'my-plugin' ),
	'description': _x( 'My block is fantastic', 'block description', 'my-plugin' ),
	'keywords': array( _x( 'fanstastic', 'block keywords', 'my-plugin' ) ),
);
```

> Implementation should follow the existing [get_plugin_data](https://codex.wordpress.org/Function_Reference/get_plugin_data) function which parses the plugin contents to retrieve the plugin’s metadata, and it applies translations dynamically.

Reviewer 2: Thanks, @aduth for all suggestions. I applied all of them. In addition, I included the above sentence as clarification.

* On the server, a block type `icon` property can only be assigned as a string and thus cannot support SVGs and component-based icons.

---

## Introduction

Blocks are the fundamental elements of the editor. They are the primary way in which plugins and themes can register their own functionality and extend the capabilities of the editor.

## Registering a block type

To register a new block type, start by creating a `block.json` file. This file:

* Gives a name to the block type.
* Defines some important metadata about the registered block type (title, category, icon, description, keywords).
* Defines the attributes of the block type.
* Links to the editor implementation of your block type, the save function and any other context-aware property.

**Example:**

```json
{
	"name": "my-plugin/notice",
	"title": "Notice",
	"category": "common",
	"parent": [ "core/group" ],
	"icon": "star",
	"description": "Shows warning, error or success notices  ...",
	"keywords": [ "alert", "message" ],
	"attributes": {
		"message": {
			"type": "string",
			"source": "html",
			"selector": ".meessage"
		}
	},
	"edit": "blocks/notice-edit.js",
	"save": "blocks/notice-save.js"

> }

Reviewer 2: There are also the following fields defined for some blocks:
- `merge` (e.g. Heading https://github.com/WordPress/gutenberg/blob/0fce12abc365ba85288bdb71b9115d598776fcb4/packages/block-library/src/heading/index.js#L146)

See the [Transforms](https://wordpress.org/gutenberg/handbook/designers-developers/developers/block-api/block-registration/#transforms-optional) documentation for more details.

### Deprecated versions

* Type: `string` (`WPDefinedPropertyFile`)
* Optional
* Localized: No
* Property: `deprecated`

```json
{ "deprecated": "my-block-deprecated.js" }
```

This property contains the definition of the deprecated versions of the block type. It is used to ensure that old blocks with old markup are not considered invalid.

See the [Deprecated Blocks](https://wordpress.org/gutenberg/handbook/designers-developers/developers/block-api/block-deprecation/) documentation for more details.

### Stylesheets

* Type: `object`
* Optional
* Localized: No
* Property: `stylesheets`

```json
{
	"stylesheets": {
		"main": "my-block-style.css",
		"editor": "my-block-editor-style.css",
		"theme": "my-block-theme-style.css"
	}
}
```

This property is a pointer to CSS files containing the CSS used for the block in different contexts.

## Backward compatibility

> There are 3 properties that are going to supported for backward compatibility reasons and are going to be replaced with alternative APIs:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Three properties are going to be supported for backward compatibility reasons on the client-side, and they are going to be replaced with alternative APIs in the future:
```

 - `supports` - see the [block supports](https://wordpress.org/gutenberg/handbook/designers-developers/developers/block-api/block-registration/#supports-optional) documentation page for more details.

>  - `merge` - not documented as of today.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
 - `merge` - undocumented as of today. Its role is to handle merging multiple blocks into one.
```

>  - `getEditWrapperProps` - not documented as well.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
 - `getEditWrapperProps` - undocumented as well. Its role is to inject additional props to the block edit's component wrapper.
```

A demonstration for how block registration could be made filterable in PHP was explored in [#5802](https://github.com/WordPress/gutenberg/pull/5802). The purpose here was to explore how plugins could have better control over the registration.

Another exploration in [#5652](https://github.com/WordPress/gutenberg/pull/5652) considered using JSON as a file format to share block type definitions between JavaScript and PHP. 

### Conclusions

* The current approaches to client-side block type registration cannot support the proposed requirement to have all block types known outside the browser context.

> * Using a statically-defined, JSON-formatted block type definition enables easy integration in both JavaScript and PHP runtimes.

Reviewer 8: > Using a statically-defined, JSON-formatted block type definition
Does this mean you intend to use individual JSON files? Or do you just mean that however it is registered, the consumer can ask for the blocks and expect to receive JSON?

Much like how we can `register_post_type()` in PHP, but still ask the REST API for a JSON list of Post Types?

Just want to clarify that the approach is _not_ to _actually_ use a .json file to register blocks.

Reviewer 2: > Just want to clarify that the approach is _not_ to _actually_ use a .json file to register blocks.

The idea is to have `register_block_type_from_json` to register block type using JSON file and the existing `register_block_type` internally conceptually. How it is going to be implemented it's not defined. I don't have opinions on that. The goal is to be able to reuse the same definition in JavaScript, PHP, and any other language which wants to perform some operations on blocks.

* Registering a block type in PHP would allow for attribute default values to be assigned as dynamically generated from some external state (e.g. a database value, or localized string).
* By default, JSON does not support localization or dynamic values.
* On the server, a block type `icon` property can only be assigned as a string and thus cannot support SVGs and component-based icons.

---

## Introduction

Blocks are the fundamental elements of the editor. They are the primary way in which plugins and themes can register their own functionality and extend the capabilities of the editor.

## Registering a block type

> To register a new block type, start by creating a `block.json` file. This file:

Reviewer 8: Why would we use a `.json` file instead of following WP conventions for ALL other registries? `register_post_type`, `register_taxonomy`, etc?

Whichever client needs the final Block registry info shouldn't be getting the data from a raw JSON file, but instead should be asking the server (REST Endpoint?) for the Block registry which would pass the registry through filters, translations, etc. 

What value does registering in JSON provide? The client should still expect to get JSON from the server as the final declaration of what a registered block is, but a raw JSON file seems to complicate things. 

For plugin authors that want to register blocks, logic can't be applied to a JSON file to dynamically add more blocks, etc. 

The registry should happen in PHP, so that folks can hook in to filter in additional blocks, use variables, translations, etc within the block registry, etc. 

I think when the client (Gutenberg) asks for the registry, it should be delivered in JSON (REST API, for example) but I don't think .json files make sense as the recommended approach to register a block.

Reviewer 9: Blocks have to be defined in both javascript and php at moment. If we force all blocks to be defined in PHP version, wouldn't this be a breaking change?

Reviewer 8: Not if we just change how the JS client reads the block registry. 

If the JS client read the registry from a REST endpoint or a `wp_localize_script` value, or whatever, it would work fine. 

We'd have to resolve the merger of server side registered blocks and client-registered blocks, but it doesn't have to be a breaking change, as long as the shape of the registry is the same. 

Gutenberg Fields Middleware is a great example of this in action. They've implemented a PHP registry for blocks that plays nice with Gutenberg core. They've gone a step further and even allow you to register fields on your blocks, all from PHP without having to write any custom JS. A Fields API for Gutenberg! With some more expansion, that could be a great approach to the server side registry, and could be fleshed out to support things like server side validation for writing data back to blocks, etc.

Worth checking out if you're not familiar with the project: https://github.com/rtCamp/gutenberg-fields-middleware

Reviewer 9: Another reason to have it as a JSON, so that we have a block registry like plugin repo. This repo could read the json for name and description. How could be do that if dyanimcally generated in PHP?

Reviewer 2: > Blocks have to be defined in both javascript and php at moment. If we force all blocks to be defined in PHP version, wouldn't this be a breaking change?

> Another reason to have it as a JSON, so that we have a block registry like plugin repo. This repo could read the json for name and description. How could be do that if dyanimcally generated in PHP?

@spacedmonkey listed 2 reasons why we JSON format is going to be useful here. Block Directory project is one of the driving factors here. @tellyworth encountered many edge cases when trying to scan the existing plugins to discover what kind of blocks they register.

There is also this `@wordpress/block-editor` subpackage which Gutenberg has which tries to be platform agnostic and with blocks being registered on the client with `registerBlockType` which reads definitions from JSON file it doesn't need to use REST API at all.

Reviewer 9: But a rest api could returned by other platforms. I am not saying not to have the json file, I am saying the javascript could read from the rest api. The benefit of this, is the values are run through php / wordpress and are then filterable / translatable in PHP.

Reviewer 2: I have a draft post for make.wordpress.org/core with the following section for REST API:

> The long term vision for the block discovery in WordPress includes:
> * Fetching the available block types through REST APIs.
> * Fetching block objects from posts through REST APIs.
>
> The proposed implementation for the server-side awareness of block types should ensure that it stays intact with all recommendations that REST API team might have. That's why we encourage the REST API team to get involved in the process early on. There is no immediate need to start working on new block type related API endpoints. However, it would be great to have it included on the roadmap. Ideally, they should stay as close as possible to the WordPress.org API and the final shape of the endpoint for searching for blocks.

So yes, we want to have those block definitions exposed from PHP through REST API or GraphQL in the future. The approach we have as of today won't scale. It allows exposing those definitions through inline JavaScript, and I don't even want to start listing all the drawback as you would probably find a bunch of other reasons why it's a bad idea. I'm sure we are all on the same page with the vision. The only difference is that we need to support also blocks registered only in JavaScript so there needs to be a path for seamless migration from what was shipped in 5.0 to the solution which will fulfill more sophisticated applications.

WordPress string discovery automatically translates these strings using the `textdomain` value specified in the plugin header.

**Example:**

```json
{
	"title": "My block",
	"description": "My block is fantastic",
	"keywords": [ "fanstastic" ]
}
```

In JavaScript, with the help of a Babel plugin, this becomes:

```js
const metadata = {
	title: _x( 'My block', 'block title', 'my-plugin' ),
	description: _x( 'My block is fantastic', 'block description', 'my-plugin' ),
	keywords: [ _x( 'fanstastic', 'block keywords', 'my-plugin' ) ],
}
```

In PHP, it is transformed at runtime to code roughly equivalent to:

```php
$metadata = array(
	'title' => _x( 'My block', 'block title', 'my-plugin' ),
	'description': _x( 'My block is fantastic', 'block description', 'my-plugin' ),
	'keywords': array( _x( 'fanstastic', 'block keywords', 'my-plugin' ) ),
);
```

Implementation should follow the existing [get_plugin_data](https://codex.wordpress.org/Function_Reference/get_plugin_data) function which parses the plugin contents to retrieve the plugin’s metadata, and it applies translations dynamically.

## PHP Runtime

> WordPress automatically discovers all the block.json files in the plugin/core `blocks` folder and registers the corresponding block types. These block types are made available through the [block registry](https://developer.wordpress.org/reference/classes/wp_block_type_registry/) PHP class and the blocks scripts and styles are added as dependencies to the `wp-block-library` script and style handles.

Reviewer 8: I'm still very confused to why `.json` files should be the source of registering blocks. Maybe I've overlooked the reasoning, but it doesn't resolve in my mind what value this brings. It feels like a step backward to have a server side registry that can't make use of the server language. 

I get that the JS client _needs_ JSON as the final format of the block registration, but can't we register blocks in PHP and the client ask for the registry from the server and have it delivered in JSON?

What am I missing?

Reviewer 9: @jasonbahl Gutenberg is no longer just a WordPress project. There ports to Drupal and other PHP frameworks. Forcing developers to use PHP and a WordPress function (would would use globals ), it limiting. Defining in JSON, makes the definition and implementation apart. Which I like.

Reviewer 8: Defining in JSON severely limits the usefulness. 

You can't do something like:

```
foreach( $new_block_type as $block_type ) {
  register_block_type( $block_type['name'], $block_type[ $config ]
}
```

in JSON, for example. 

There's also a LOT of things missing from Gutenberg to make it production ready, like the ability to validate input on the server when a block is edited, and a JSON file isn't going to help much with that. 

We need to be able to define things like `sanitize_callback` on Block attributes so the server can have the final say on what data is safe to be saved to the server. Right now, Gutenberg allows anything to be saved, whether it will break your application or not. 

If there's a server side registry, there will be more clients than just a JS client (CLI, REST, GraphQL, others)

And if the server can't validate input, which it can't now, then we're all in trouble. 

WordPress core features should be developed with WordPress users in mind, and if it can also work in Drupal or elsewhere, I think that's fantastic, but sacrificing the WP developer/user experience and data integrity to try and support other CMS cases doesn't help WP or the other CMS.

Reviewer 9: I don't disagree with you. But I think gutenberg is keeping headerless in mind always. I also have to think, what problem are being trying to solve here. `sanitize_callback`, `auth_callback` and `default_values` are all something i would love to see gutenberg blocks.

Having written a number of blocks, the definition needs to be in available in core at compile time and dynamically genereated blocks wouldn't work well with that. 

I do however think that block definitions should read for the api and run through PHP, for the simple reason, they will run through filters and transaction functions.

Reviewer 4: While I think the relationship between the two could be made clearer in this document, it's my understanding that `register_block_type` still exists and is still ultimately how the block becomes known to the server. That the non-behavioral properties of a block be defined in a static format is to simplify reusability between server and client implementations†, and to enable understanding of blocks in a broader set of use-cases by benefit of its static analyzability (e.g. the [block directory efforts](https://make.wordpress.org/meta/2019/03/08/the-block-directory-and-a-new-type-of-plugin/)).

† In both PHP and JavaScript, blocks are registered as a combination of static values from the JSON file and runtime-specific logic of their respective languages / contexts, if necessary.

Reviewer 9: @aduth Couldn't the definition of the block come from the rest api, allowing you to register dynamic blocks purely in PHP? This would make the rest api the point of truth for the defintion of a block. There are lots of contexts like the WP CLI, where this would be useful.

Reviewer 4: > @aduth Couldn't the definition of the block come from the rest api, allowing you to register dynamic blocks purely in PHP? This would make the rest api the point of truth for the defintion of a block. There are lots of contexts like the WP CLI, where this would be useful.

An endpoint can (and presumably will) exist in the context of a site, sure. For something like the block directory work, it needs to attain information about a block purely from the contents of a plugin, without a site or its REST API to consume from.

* By default, JSON does not support localization or dynamic values.
* On the server, a block type `icon` property can only be assigned as a string and thus cannot support SVGs and component-based icons.

---

## Introduction

Blocks are the fundamental elements of the editor. They are the primary way in which plugins and themes can register their own functionality and extend the capabilities of the editor.

## Registering a block type

To register a new block type, start by creating a `block.json` file. This file:

* Gives a name to the block type.
* Defines some important metadata about the registered block type (title, category, icon, description, keywords).
* Defines the attributes of the block type.
* Registers all the scripts and styles for your block type.

**Example:**

```json
{
	"name": "my-plugin/notice",
	"title": "Notice",
	"category": "common",
	"parent": [ "core/group" ],
	"icon": "star",
	"description": "Shows warning, error or success notices  ...",
	"keywords": [ "alert", "message" ],
	"textDomain": "my-plugin",
	"attributes": {
		"message": {
			"type": "string",
			"source": "html",

> 			"selector": ".meessage"

Reviewer 10: ```suggestion
			"selector": ".message"
```

Found a typo

## Assets

### `WPDefinedAsset`

The `WPDefinedAsset` type is a subtype of string, where the value must represent an absolute or relative path to a JavaScript or CSS file.

**Example:**

In `block.json`:
```json
{ "editorScript": "build/editor.js" }
```

#### WordPress context

In the context of WordPress, when a block is registered with PHP, it will automatically register all scripts and styles that are found in the `block.json` file.

That's why, the `WPDefinedAsset` type has to offer a way to mirror also the shape of params necessary to register scripts and styles using [`wp_register_script`](https://developer.wordpress.org/reference/functions/wp_register_script/) and [`wp_register_style`](https://developer.wordpress.org/reference/functions/wp_register_style/), and then assign these as handles associated with your block using the `script`, `style`, `editor_script`, and `editor_style` block type registration settings.

It's possible to provide an object which takes the following shape:
- `handle` (`string`) - the name of the script. If omitted, it will be auto-generated.

> - `dependencies` (`string[]`) - an array of registered script handles this script depends on.  Default value: `array()`.

Reviewer 4: It's a bit confusing whether we're talking about the default value in the context of `wp_register_block` or as in the `asset.json` file, but if it's considered more as the latter, it may be more appropriate to write this as:

```suggestion
- `dependencies` (`string[]`) - an array of registered script handles this script depends on.  Default value: `[]`.
```

(Which also shares meaning in PHP, assuming PHP 5.4+)

Reviewer 2: I copied it from WordPress docs, it should be updated to align with JSON format :)

WordPress string discovery automatically translates these strings using the `textDomain` property specified in the `block.json` file.

**Example:**

```json
{
	"title": "My block",
	"description": "My block is fantastic",
	"keywords": [ "fantastic" ],
	"textDomain": "my-plugin"
}
```

In JavaScript, with the help of a Babel plugin, this becomes:

```js
const metadata = {
	title: _x( 'My block', 'block title', 'my-plugin' ),
	description: _x( 'My block is fantastic', 'block description', 'my-plugin' ),
	keywords: [ _x( 'fantastic', 'block keywords', 'my-plugin' ) ],
}
```

In PHP, it is transformed at runtime to code roughly equivalent to:

```php
<?php
$metadata = array(
	'title'       => _x( 'My block', 'block title', 'my-plugin' ),
	'description' => _x( 'My block is fantastic!', 'block description', 'my-plugin' ),
	'keywords'    => array( _x( 'fantastic', 'block keywords', 'my-plugin' ) ),
);
```

Implementation should follow the existing [get_plugin_data](https://codex.wordpress.org/Function_Reference/get_plugin_data) function which parses the plugin contents to retrieve the plugin’s metadata, and it applies translations dynamically.

## PHP Runtime

> WordPress automatically discovers all the block.json files in the plugin/core `blocks` folder and registers the corresponding block types. These block types are made available through the [block registry](https://developer.wordpress.org/reference/classes/wp_block_type_registry/) PHP class and the blocks scripts and styles are added as dependencies to the `wp-block-library` script and style handles.

Reviewer 4: I didn't really notice this section 'til now. It seems a bit oddly specific a thing to commit to supporting. It's also not entirely clear in its wording: If it's discovering a file by the name of `block.json`, there could only be a maximum of one in a `blocks` folder? Or is the idea that each individual block type would be in its own sub-folder of `blocks` (which is not clarified here)? Noting also that these definitions are "block types", not "blocks", which is a small semantic point, but one which we may want to consider before committing to one or the other. Where is the "core `blocks` folder"?

Reviewer 2: @youknowriad - do you think we need to keep it and adjust to how it works in Gutenberg core or do you agree that it's something that could be removed as it still needs to be clarified once we have some plugins using `block.json` files? As of today, we have `packages/block-library/src` folder containing `block.json` for each static block. All of them are located in their own folder next to JS and CSS files.

Author: I think it's very important to have this API in place and be documented in the RFC. 

I don't have a strong opinion on whether we remove from the RFC now and bring it back later or keep it and adjust as we implement it.

Reviewer 11: IMO I almost feel like this is a WordPress-specific implementation detail, and is better suited for a separate RFC. The block schema definition is more generic and can apply to any Gutenberg environment, but how WordPress discovers and registers blocks internally seems like something that should be determined separately.

Author: I still think it's very related. the RFC we're writing is WordPress specific even if some parts of it are meant to be CMS agnostic like the `block.json` without the assets part.

That said, I feel this needs time to mature. I won't oppose it being removed and reincluded in follow-up PRs.

Reviewer 2: Removed with f3456fe and moved to the follow-up issue opened: #16209.

* Localized: No
* Property: `script`

```json
{
	"script": {
		"handle": "my-plugin-notice",
		"file": "index.js",
		"dependencies": [ "wp-element", "wp-components" ],
		"version": "3.0.0"
	}
}
```

Block type frontend script definition. It will be enqueued both in the editor and when viewing the content on the front of the site.

### Editor Style

* Type: `string|object` ([WPDefinedAsset](#WPDefinedAsset))
* Optional
* Localized: No
* Property: `editorStyle`

```json
{
	"editorStyle": {
		"handle": "my-plugin-notice-editor",
		"file": "editor.css",
		"dependencies": [ "wp-edit-blocks" ]
	}
}
```

Block type editor style definition. It will only be enqueued in the context of the editor.

### Style

* Type: `string|object` ([WPDefinedAsset](#WPDefinedAsset))
* Optional
* Localized: No
* Property: `style`

```json
{ "style": "build/style.css" }
```

Block type frontend style definition. It will be enqueued both in the editor and when viewing the content on the front of the site.

### Render Callback

* Type: `string` ([WPDefinedPropertyFile](#WPDefinedPropertyFile))
* Optional
* Localized: No
* Property: `renderCallback`

```json
{ "renderCallback": "my-render-callback.php" }
```

> This is a pointer to a php file returning a render callback php function. The render callback is function called when the block is rendered on the frontend. It's used to generate the frontend markup dynamically.

Reviewer 11: Yeah, this is a little confusing. It sounds like the expectation is that you would have a file that returns a callable…? Something like this?

```
<?php

return function ( $attributes ) {
    return '<div> My block markup </div>';
};
```

I'm not sure there's any precedent for this in Core (I'm not even sure when it became possible to return closures; is that available in PHP 5.6?) and it honestly feels like a strange solution overall.

I understand the intent here is for a unified, centralised API but this almost feels like a case where the better approach would be for the central block definition format to be agnostic to the existence of render callbacks, and have it so you actually _bind your `render_callback` to the block_ through a WordPress core filter or something like that. In other words, the server side rendering stops being an intrinsic property of the block, and is instead an implementation that is specific to the rendering engine, whether that's WordPress or another framework.

```
<?php
// Pseudo-code; don't take too seriously.

$block_html = apply_filters( 'wp_{$block_name}_render_callback', $block_html, $attributes, $raw_block_html );
```

This would also better enable custom rendering pipeline for core blocks, and could also open up server side rendering as an option for non-PHP contexts.

> This is a pointer to a php file returning a render callback php function. The render callback is function called when the block is rendered on the frontend. It's used to generate the frontend markup dynamically.

Reviewer 9: In PHP callbacks are defined as [such](https://www.php.net/manual/en/language.types.callable.php). 

```
Some functions like call_user_func() or usort() accept user-defined callback functions as a parameter. Callback functions can not only be simple functions, but also object methods, including static class methods.
```

This is extremely confusing as a PHP developer.  Callbacks are functions / methods and not a file. A file like this should be called a template, a template file shouldn't need a callable function in it. 

See how [acf_register_block_type](https://www.advancedcustomfields.com/resources/acf_register_block_type/) docs explain it. 
They list `render_template` and `render_callback` as two different args. I am not sure which one is used if both are defined. It is also much easier to control, if template only ever expects a file and callback a callable function. 

To allow for namespaces and methods on classes to be callbacks, those MUST be defined in php.

> This is a pointer to a php file returning a render callback php function. The render callback is function called when the block is rendered on the frontend. It's used to generate the frontend markup dynamically.

Reviewer 2: > I'm not sure there's any precedent for this in Core (I'm not even sure when it became possible to return closures; is that available in PHP 5.6?) and it honestly feels like a strange solution overall.

Core is now PHP 5.6+ so it doesn't seem to be a technical limitation anymore, however, I get your point about the familiarity of the patterns used. In JavaScript world the fact that would be highly expected approach but I see that it might not click here.

> I understand the intent here is for a unified, centralised API but this almost feels like a case where the better approach would be for the central block definition format to be agnostic to the existence of render callbacks, and have it so you actually _bind your `render_callback` to the block_ through a WordPress core filter or something like that.

Well, you made a really good point that it's very specific to WordPress implementation written in PHP. There is a related discussion started by @iandunn where he proposes to render dynamic blocks on the front end in JavaScript instead of PHP. This would fit better to what you describe in your comment.

> ```
> <?php
> // Pseudo-code; don't take too seriously.
> 
> $block_html = apply_filters( 'wp_{$block_name}_render_callback', $block_html, $attributes, $raw_block_html );
> ```
> 
> 
> This would also better enable custom rendering pipeline for core blocks, and could also open up server side rendering as an option for non-PHP contexts.

I wouldn't be opposed personally to removing `renderCallback` from the proposal at all and provide an alternative way to register this `renderCallback` in PHP. There are several ways you could do it, the simplest one could be:

```php
register_block_type(
    'path/to/my/plugin/block.json',
    array( 'render_callback' => 'my_plugin_render_callback' )
);
```

> They list `render_template` and `render_callback` as two different args. I am not sure which one is used if both are defined. It is also much easier to control, if template only ever expects a file and callback a callable function.

The other benefit of keeping it outside of `block.json` is that you could support both ways of registering those callback similar to ACF does.

> This is a pointer to a php file returning a render callback php function. The render callback is function called when the block is rendered on the frontend. It's used to generate the frontend markup dynamically.

Reviewer 9: I think that registering the render callback is a runtime implementation. A php file would mean nothing in node or python. This locks the render too php, which isn’t great. 

Render template or better yet, render require, would just require a file. This file could be Javascript / php or whatever manage. It would be up the runtime what to do about that require. In node, if the file ends with .php, it could choose to do nothing with that require. It opens up to Javascript template files.

* By default, JSON does not support localization or dynamic values.
* On the server, a block type `icon` property can only be assigned as a string and thus cannot support SVGs and component-based icons.

---

## Introduction

Blocks are the fundamental elements of the editor. They are the primary way in which plugins and themes can register their own functionality and extend the capabilities of the editor.

## Registering a block type

To register a new block type, start by creating a `block.json` file. This file:

* Gives a name to the block type.
* Defines some important metadata about the registered block type (title, category, icon, description, keywords).
* Defines the attributes of the block type.
* Registers all the scripts and styles for your block type.

**Example:**

```json
{
	"name": "my-plugin/notice",
	"title": "Notice",
	"category": "common",
	"parent": [ "core/group" ],
	"icon": "star",
	"description": "Shows warning, error or success notices  ...",
	"keywords": [ "alert", "message" ],
	"textDomain": "my-plugin",
	"attributes": {
		"message": {
			"type": "string",
			"source": "html",
			"selector": ".meessage"
		}
	},

> 	"styles": [ 

Author: This is a new API with can consider renaming styels as styleVariations or something like that

> 	"styles": [ 

Reviewer 2: `styleVariations` seems like a good compromise and can be easily aliased in the definition for backward compatibility.

> 	"styles": [ 

Reviewer 2: With 4c53f6a we have `styleVariations` which allows `styles` as alias as well. We can do the mapping outside of `block.json` as well.

		{ "name": "default", "label": "Default", "isDefault": true }, 
		{ "name": "other", "label": "Other" }
	],

> 	"editorScript": "file:build/editor.assets.json",

Reviewer 12: ```suggestion
	"editorScript": "file:build/editor.asset.json",
```

	"script": {
		"handle": "my-plugin-notice",
		"file": "index.js",
		"dependencies": [ "wp-element", "wp-components" ],
		"version": "3.0.0"
	},
	"editorStyle": {
		"handle": "my-plugin-notice-editor",
		"file": "editor.css",
		"dependencies": [ "wp-edit-blocks" ]
	},
	"style": "my-plugin-notice",

> 	"renderCallback": "file:my-render-callback.php"

Reviewer 2: See https://github.com/WordPress/gutenberg/blob/0956465e2fa630feaa6a76a0a1898ae584d9335d/docs/rfc/block-registration.md#wpdefinedpropertyfile for more details.

> 	"renderCallback": "file:my-render-callback.php"

Reviewer 9: @gziolo I read that and still doesn't map to WordPress or PHP. This shouldn't be called a renderCallback. In PHP callbacks are defined as [such](https://www.php.net/manual/en/language.types.callable.php). 

```
Some functions like call_user_func() or usort() accept user-defined callback functions as a parameter. Callback functions can not only be simple functions, but also object methods, including static class methods.
```

This is extremely confusing as a PHP developer.  Callbacks are functions / methods and not a file. A file like this should be called a template, a template file shouldn't need a callable function in it. 

See how [acf_register_block_type](https://www.advancedcustomfields.com/resources/acf_register_block_type/) docs explain it. 
They list `render_template` and `render_callback` as two different args. I am not sure which one is used if both are defined. It is also much easier to control, if template only ever expects a file and callback a callable function.

> 	"renderCallback": "file:my-render-callback.php"

Reviewer 2: `render_template` is a very interesting idea. I'm wondering if it would work with Node if you would like to apply it let's see in Gatsby.

**Note:** This name is used on the comment delimiters as `<!-- wp:my-plugin/book -->`. Block types in the `core` namespace do not include a namespace when serialized.

### Title

* Type: `string`
* Required
* Localized: Yes
* Property: `title`

```json
{ "title": "Heading" }
```

This is the display title for your block, which can be translated with our translation functions. The block inserter will show this name.

### Category

* Type: `string`
* Required
* Localized: No
* Property: `category`

```json
{ "category": "common" }
```

Blocks are grouped into categories to help users browse and discover them.

The core provided categories are:

* common
* formatting
* layout
* widgets
* embed

Plugins and Themes can also register [custom block categories](/docs/designers-developers/developers/filters/block-filters.md#managing-block-categories).

An implementation should expect and tolerate unknown categories, providing some reasonable fallback behavior (e.g. a "common" category).

### Parent

* Type: `string[]`
* Optional
* Localized: No
* Property: `parent`

```json
{ "parent": [ "my-block/product" ] }
```

> Setting `parent` lets a block require that it is only available when nested within the specified blocks. For example, you might want to allow an 'Add to Cart' block to only be available within a 'Product' block.

Reviewer 6: Are wildcards permitted here?

Reviewer 2: @noisysocks or @jorgefilipecosta, do you remember whether wildcards will work as well? I know it was discussed during the implementation phase.

Reviewer 4: This is the effective implementation:

https://github.com/WordPress/gutenberg/blob/0e46e9ef92d27aa4af849c482c81216b9c579410/packages/block-editor/src/store/selectors.js#L1092-L1100

To answer the question: No, wildcards aren't (currently) supported.

Separately:

- A boolean type _is_ supported, which isn't reflected yet in this proposal.
- If and when #14908, there will be precedent for wildcards in block transforms ([source](https://github.com/WordPress/gutenberg/pull/14908/files#diff-a5c77b070da74373cd1d937dee3a77eaR242)), and it certainly seems like an equivalent behavior _could_ be implemented for `parent`.

Reviewer 13: That's right. From memory, we decided to keep it very barebones with a view to iterating on it.

Reviewer 2: Should we include `boolean` here as well? It looks like `true` is something which you would never want to use as it means - allow all. `false` can be represented as `[]`.

Reviewer 4: > * If and when #14908, there will be precedent for wildcards in block transforms ([source](https://github.com/WordPress/gutenberg/pull/14908/files#diff-a5c77b070da74373cd1d937dee3a77eaR242)), and it certainly seems like an equivalent behavior _could_ be implemented for `parent`.

We should create a follow-on issue for this. That said, it's not directly mentioned as being possible in this RFC. Which begs the question: Should it be, if we're saying it ought to be possible?

Reviewer 2: Copied to #16209 which contains the list of future enhancements to this RFC.

### Icon

> * Type: `string``

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* Type: `string`
```

		},
		"author": {
			"type": "string",
			"source": "html",
			"selector": ".book-author"
		}
	}
}
```

Attributes provide the structured data needs of a block. They can exist in different forms when they are serialized, but they are declared together under a common interface.

See the [the attributes documentation](/docs/designers-developers/developers/block-api/block-attributes.md) for more details.

### Style Variations

*   Type: `array`
*   Optional
*   Localized: Yes (`label`)
*   Property: `styles`

```json
{ 
	"styles": [ 
		{ "name": "default", "label": "Default", "isDefault": true }, 
		{ "name": "other", "label": "Other" }
	]
}
```

Block styles can be used to provide alternative styles to block. It works by adding a class name to the block's wrapper. Using CSS, a theme developer can target the class name for the style variation if it is selected.

Plugins and Themes can also register [custom block style](/docs/designers-developers/developers/filters/block-filters.md#block-style-variations) for existing blocks.

### Editor Script

* Type: `string|object` ([WPDefinedAsset](#WPDefinedAsset))
* Optional
* Localized: No
* Property: `editorScript`

```json

> { "editorScript": "file:build/editor.assets.json" }

Reviewer 12: ```suggestion
{ "editorScript": "file:build/editor.asset.json" }
```

* Optional
* Localized: No
* Property: `editorStyle`

```json
{
	"editorStyle": {
		"handle": "my-plugin-notice-editor",
		"file": "editor.css",
		"dependencies": [ "wp-edit-blocks" ]
	}
}
```

Block type editor style definition. It will only be enqueued in the context of the editor.

### Style

* Type: `string|object` ([WPDefinedAsset](#WPDefinedAsset))
* Optional
* Localized: No
* Property: `style`

```json
{ "style": "my-plugin-notice" }
```

Block type frontend style definition. It will be enqueued both in the editor and when viewing the content on the front of the site.

### Render Callback

* Type: `string` ([WPDefinedPropertyFile](#WPDefinedPropertyFile))
* Optional
* Localized: No
* Property: `renderCallback`

```json
{ "renderCallback": "file:my-render-callback.php" }
```

This is a pointer to a php file returning a render callback php function. The render callback is function called when the block is rendered on the frontend. It's used to generate the frontend markup dynamically.

See the [dynamic blocks documentation](/docs/designers-developers/developers/tutorials/block-tutorial/creating-dynamic-blocks.md) for more details.

> 

Reviewer 9: Could there be another property of supported post types? It will likely be the case they developers will want to limit where blocks are displayable once the widget areas are blocks as well.

Reviewer 2: It's out of the scope of this proposal but I'm sure this is something which is going to be discussed soon as we start to see blocks in the widget areas.

Reviewer 9: But this is already an issue, as I for want to limit blocks to post type for custom post types. Take for example, a product post type, you would likely want to limit this to just product based blocks. 

My worry here is when existing blocks are converted use this format, we if add more fields to the registered, that will require developers to go back and rework all their blocks again.

Reviewer 2: There is an existing PHP filter which:

> Filters the allowed block types for the editor, defaulting to true (all block types supported).

https://github.com/WordPress/wordpress-develop/blob/8081adfefa61dd58dbbebe107aa9a6068f865c8b/src/wp-admin/edit-form-blocks.php#L138-L148

It allows applying a different set of block per post type, id or anything else that a post object contains. I'm sure it's not perfect and it would be great to have more control over and maybe we could extend `parent` field to use it as a way to limit block's exposure to the list of CPTs. It's defintely something we should further explore but I consider it as a new feature. We should discuss it separately. There is also a related issue which impacts `InnerBlocks` where you can't filter `allowedBlocks` option when used inside `edit` function (#15682). It seems like those 2 items could be tackled together.

#### Handle

First, in WordPress context, it's possible to register a script or style with a regular PHP function call and then assign the handle (`string`) to the corresponding property in `block.json` file.

**Example:**

In `index.php`:
```php
wp_register_script(
	'my-plugin-notice-editor',
	plugins_url( 'build/editor.js', __FILE__ ),
	array( 'wp-blocks', 'wp-element', 'wp-i18n' ),
	'3.0.0'
);
```

In `block.json`:
```json
{ "editorScript": "my-plugin-notice-editor"  }
```

#### Object

An asset can also be defined as an object which takes the following shape:
- `handle` (`string`) - the name of the script.
- `file` (`string`) - full URL of the script, or path of the script relative to the WordPress root directory.
- `dependencies` (`string[]` - optional) - an array of registered script handles this script depends on.  Default value: `array()`.

> - `version` (`string`|`bool`|`null` - optional) - string specifying the script version number, if it has one, which is added to the URL as a query string for cache busting purposes. If the version is set to `false`, a version number is automatically added equal to current installed WordPress version. If set to `null`, no version is added. Default value: `false`.

Reviewer 12: What is the behavior for `true`, or is that not a valid value? It's not clear in [`wp_register_script`](https://developer.wordpress.org/reference/functions/wp_register_script/#parameters) either.

If the behavior is undefined, should we limit the signature as follows?

```suggestion
- `version` (`string`|`false`|`null` - optional) - string specifying the script version number, if it has one, which is added to the URL as a query string for cache busting purposes. If the version is set to `false`, a version number is automatically added equal to current installed WordPress version. If set to `null`, no version is added. Default value: `false`.
```

Reviewer 2: Yes, I copied it from `wp_register_script` but what you proposed makes more sense 👍

When a block is registered with PHP, it will also automatically register all scripts and styles that are found in the `block.json` file.

**Example:**

In `block.json`:
```json
{

> 	"editorScript": {

Reviewer 12: The whitespace here makes this section difficult to read. This line has a tab and the following have spaces. It would be nice to make sure the indentation nests properly.

Reviewer 2: Fixed  with 42d6c62afc87a73f48e81d65ff224bbcdfe74805.

	"icon": "star",
	"description": "Shows warning, error or success notices  ...",
	"keywords": [ "alert", "message" ],
	"textDomain": "my-plugin",
	"attributes": {
		"message": {
			"type": "string",
			"source": "html",
			"selector": ".meessage"
		}
	},
	"styles": [ 
		{ "name": "default", "label": "Default", "isDefault": true }, 
		{ "name": "other", "label": "Other" }
	],
	"editorScript": "file:build/editor.assets.json",

> 	"script": {

Author: The difference between script and editorScript is not obvious, is this more "frontendScript" or a script that is loaded everywhere?

Should we support "file:build/editor.assets.json" from the start? Can this be left out and considered later as needed? It does seem unnecessary at the moment.

Reviewer 2: Well, it's not clear for me as well. According to PHP code comments, it loads on both frontend and in the editor. I'm sure it's true for `style`, it has to be confirmed for `script` 🤷‍♂

Reviewer 2: https://github.com/WordPress/wordpress-develop/blob/14066540c00dc82a7682e016f35861a356a555ab/src/wp-includes/script-loader.php#L2735-L2752

It's both the editor and frontend.

> 		"handle": "my-plugin-notice",

Author: Do we really need a "handle"? can't it be just auto-generated in PHP based on the script?

Reviewer 2: Yep, I think you can generate them from the name of the block. This is how I did it myself :)

		"file": "index.js",

> 		"dependencies": [ "wp-element", "wp-components" ],

Author: Based on the discussion on this ticket https://core.trac.wordpress.org/ticket/47350 I'd think that omitting the "dependencies" here would automatically mean, check for the existence of `index.deps.json` to load them.

Reviewer 2: We are going to deprecate `index.deps.json` in favor of `index.asset.json` which will contain the full object instead. It doesn't make sense to go so granular in my opinion.

Author: What's the reason for this change?

Reviewer 2: You can have better control over `version` with webpack as you can use the hash it generates based on the content of the file. Webpack knows the path of file as well. It also can generate the handle so why to even bother with it manually?

Author: I'm thinking from a SoC Point of view. We shouldn't be designing this `block.json` API based on the fact that we have a wepack plugin that can generate some of it. Some people might not use webpack, others might. So what's the common best API for both

		"version": "3.0.0"
	},
	"editorStyle": {
		"handle": "my-plugin-notice-editor",
		"file": "editor.css",
		"dependencies": [ "wp-edit-blocks" ]
	},

> 	"style": "my-plugin-notice",

Author: What does this mean? I guess handles, for me handles doesn't mean a lot of things outside a WP context. I'd prefer if we avoid them entirely and just use them where absolute necessity (deps)

Shouldn't we just have a single way of defining all these scripts/styles/renderCallback?

Reviewer 2: See the Assets section in RFC which covers it in depth. This tries to bring some backward compatibility. I don't have a strong opinion about it.

Reviewer 2: I’m personally okay with removing the handle from the original proposal and changing `"editorScript": "file:build/editor.asset.json",` to `"editorScript": "file:build/editor.js",` and making the discovery of `asset.json` file an internal thing supported by WordPress given that it might not make sense in the context if only own playground.

Reviewer 4: > Edit: I also figured out that if we don't want to support handles we don't have to use `file:` prefix anymore.

I think it would be nice if we could avoid it, yes.

Depending if we want to support file references for the `icon` property, it's something to consider whether we need to be able to distinguish between an icon slug and and an icon file.

Honestly, I don't think it's much of an issue anyways, particularly if we can either enforce that a file should be defined as relative (will always start with `.`) or has a file extension (will always end in `.` and an extension, e.g. `.svg`).

Reviewer 2: 4c53f6a contains the updated proposal.

> > to `"editorScript": "build/editor.js",` and making the discovery of `asset.json` file an internal thing supported by WordPress given that it might not make sense in the context if only own playground.

I took this approach.

> * What if someone wanted to be able to reference an already-registered script or style handle?

They reference the existing file and WordPress ensure they aren't duplicated. I wonder how it is handled as of today.

> * Multiple blocks referencing the same file (like we have today for core blocks)

You can also omit those asset definitions, at least this is what we will initially do for core blocks.

> * Is `file` in `editor.asset.json` even necessary anymore? Or can it be assumed to be its adjacent `.js` file from its own basename?

`file` is not necessary for this scenario.

> * How are `handle` and `version` assigned (notably if this file is auto-generated)?

`handle` can be machine-generated based on the name of the block and asset type:

```js
const handle = kebabCase( `${ block-type }-${ assetType } );
```

`version` can be either generated by webpack using one of its internal hashes or inherited from the plugin's version somehow.
